Within the realm of land information New Zealand.
Um, but I don't have any plans personally to, um,
produce any further less that would give different direction
to the OIO beyond that which it currently has.
I mean, you have indicated just before and,
and, um, you know, certainly may best farm practice
and I guess that's, um, it may
or may not include obligations around climate change.
And, and clearly the government's indicated that, uh,
has backed off some initial targets, um,
has made noises about a 2050 net zero,
but actually, you know, that's quite some way out.
So do you,
will your directive letter make any reference to,
I guess, obligations around climate change mitigation,
around reduction of emissions, carbon reduction or whatever?
Yeah, there, there are no directive letters in my name
and I don't contemplate making any, uh,
in the near future mark.
I've actually got a couple of something,
which is one from the previous.
Okay. Question asked. And then one on the OIA.
Um, it was good to hear that for the coastal mapping
that you would like love to see a hundred percent
of the coastline ma.
Um, so I'm just wondering what your thoughts are, fact
that obviously, um, Liz went from having a target
of 85% mapped down to 40% based on the, the budget, um,
savings they had to, to make.
Is there any concern about the fact they had went backwards
in their target to 40%
with obviously this is quite important
piece of work that needs to be done?
Yeah, yeah. I mean, thanks for acknowledging it is an
important piece of work and I
think we would all agree with that.
Um, of course, what seems to me the most important thing is
that we move forward not in terms of, um, targets
and percentages, um, on a piece of paper,
but rather in the real world that the percentage of the map
that's, um, excuse me, the percentage of the coast
that's mapped in that way is increasing over time.
And of course that is the case, and at the point that we get
to 40%, we can continue to work ahead to 85%
and ultimately of course to a hundred percent.
But, um, you know, that that won't happen overnight.
Um, but, um, it will happen
trying to avoid a, a specific reference.
Yeah. We're all thinking it, here we go.
Any timeframes in mind? Uh, not overnight.
Um, I guess with, with regards to the, um, the bill
that's currently going through there will see changes
to the Overseas Investment Act
that effectively weakens public oversight, um,
over sense of land, forestry and water resources.
What advice, analysis and
or evidence did Lins provide you, um,
2020 4 25 on the performance
of current overseas investment screening test,
and how did that inform the
development of these changes now? Um,
Yeah, I mean obviously I wouldn't agree
that there's a weakening of oversight.
I think, uh, we need a system that is, um, robust
and meets the policy aims as
captured in the current legislation, which is obviously, um,
that we balance the considerations of, um,
land and other asset ownership in this country
by non Zealand persons as defined on the one hand,
but also recognizing the benefits of such investment where
that can have a stimulatory effect in terms of employment
skills, um, uh, revenue for the government so
that we can afford to map more of the coast and so on.
Um, but I think, um, the performance of the OIO has been,
um, very, uh, commendable.
Um, and I think particularly the quality of work
that's produced in, um, timeframes that have been, um,
directed by government, um, has been, as I say,
recommendable and, and I'm grateful to them for that.
So I was just trying to work out the advice you analysis.
Uh, I mean I I I don't have specific statistics in front
of me, but is there, is it a particular category
that you are after that I might be able to help with or?
Oh, just anything in general that's actually, I guess, um,
informed the development of the changes or,
or since we can look at the data, um, that you were given
that, um, I guess demonstrate the pressure orchestrates on
existing, on the existing regime
and how that was used to inform the cabinet decision.
Um, I mean, I, I, I think I'd simply observed
that the cabinet decision was taken, um, on the basis
of a number of factors including, you know, the,
the historic and current performance of the IIO, which I,
as I say, I think sound really impressive at the moment.
And, um, seems to me that we can struck a balance
between those, um, uh, priorities
as I've outlined at the start.
And, and it seems to me that legislation that's, um,
been introduced by the government
is designed to do exactly that.
Um, so, so from the submissions there were 961 submitters,
um, on the bill that we're concerned.
And the, the concern was from the public was, uh,
that the weakening of the national interest test will have
direct, um, impacts on forestry due to, due
to irresponsible land use, poor management of forestry
and cutting rights, um, by mainly overseas owned companies,
directly impacting fragile soils, injury rates,
coastal communities, rivers and fisheries.
Um, what advice
or concerns were raised with yourself, um, in 24 25
and the development of the bill
regarding the environmental impacts?
Yeah, I, I, I, I mean, I think those categories of, um,
issue are all really important.
So naturally I interest myself in submissions that are made,
um, by members of the public, um, whether of a general
interest or perhaps a particular perspective of knowledge
or expertise, um, official advice obviously is
provided to the select committee as part of that process.
And, and again, of course I'm interested in that.
Um, having said that, of course, you know, decisions made
by government as a whole on the basis
of collective cabinet responsibility reflect our
understanding of, um, the ways in which those concerns
or risks could be mitigated
and should be mitigated and will be mitigated.
Um, look, thank you.
And, and I know this is, uh, area of sushi's concerns about,
you know, um, proper land management management,
the property, but yeah, and for treats, settlements, um,
I guess, um, Lynn have said here on the report,
of course it says that quote,
good faith is a difficult concept to measure quantitatively,
but engaging in good faith is important to Iwi and Maori.
And I guess the question of, um, the importance of it,
do you think that that has been undermined
by the coalition's passage of the Regulatory Standards Act?
Uh, no, I don't.
Um, I don't think it's particularly within the scope
of the interaction between Land Information New Zealand
and, um, iwi various, um, I, it seems to me that's, um,
various iwi
and post treaty settlement entities in particular, um,
have an excellent relationship with the Crown in terms
of the work of land information New Zealand.
I'm really grateful when I observe that,
and I know that there's a lot of hard work
that's gone on on both sides characterized
by an underlying sense of good faith, um, in terms
of those interactions, because of course,
we understand the Crown has an obligation in terms of
specific treaty settlements, but also more generally in
terms of that partnership arrangement.
I mean, I think there was a case where,
where some clarity was given today around, um, in,
I think was about, and,
and yes, uh, that, that, you know,
it is important to maintain that good faith to ensure
that these things don't drag on.
And so, um, you know, I, I guess there would be people
who say that actually the good,
the good faith has been undermined.
Um, but I guess we'll watch and,
and see the space over each 12 months. Yeah,
I certainly hope not, but I, but of course, you know,
we should always be alive to the possibility that that, um,
you know, with different parties to an arrangement that,
that if a different view develops, um,
then we should be mindful of that.
And of course we need to be respectful and, and responsive
and at the very least, um,
meet the minimum legal obligations.
But I think going further than that, um, be, um, aware
of the necessity of a good relationship, um,
and an enduring relationship between the Crown
through land information New Zealand, uh,
and, um, you know, iwi Maori various including,
and especially in the treaty settle context.
Of course.
So, so, um, you said you have visited, um, a couple
of high country leases.
I know that, you know, the legislation had been trained
under the previous government kind of rolling
through a different regime,
and we had discussion with officials earlier on,
but, um, do you get the sense
or did you discuss with them the concept of of,
of a more comprehensive farm plan
and working with regional councils
in a more cooperative way?
Yeah, I mean, I certainly had, um, conversations
that I think were really helpful to my understanding and,
and, um, and the unlikely event that, um, the
high country station owners are watching this broadcast.
Um, I want to thank them for the hospitality
and the generosity of time.
Um, but they shared with me and, and,
and continue to share with Lynn who are, you know, again,
a really active and valued partner, um, in that space.
Um, their experiences, um, across a number
of different regulatory regimes I've mentioned
before, the resource management, um, space,
and the extent to which that duplicates
and even some cases incon is inconsistent
with the Crown Pastoral release regime.
So, um, it was helpful to hear, um, the way in which
regional councils particularly Ecan,
'cause of course it's that South island context, um,
you know, are required to administer the rules
and interpret the rules as they see fit.
And, and I think, you know, we, we can end up in a space
that is a win-win for all concerns,
including regional council, if we give them clarity about,
um, the way in which they should interpret
and administer resource management laws in a way
that doesn't undermine the intent of
that crown pastoral, um, regime.
So on that particular issue, on, on a win-win, then,
then what advice or what observation have you made,
because you may have been up to Lake Huron Yes.
Um, and the Ash Burton Lakes. Yes.
Um, and what is a, a, an acute issue
that the regional councils having to address there?
What's your understanding of the dilemma?
Uh, um, it would depend what dilemma you're
Referring. I guess it's, it's growing
nutrient levels in those,
in those shallow lakes up there and,
and it has been intensification, um, and it's hard.
I mean, I'm, I'm getting back from that is not easy,
but I guess the question to you is
what do you think should happen in
that space given the regional council has obligations?
Yeah, I'm not sure that I should venture a a non-technical
opinion on, on what exactly is needed,
but, um, so I'll just, I suppose content myself, if not,
if not you, with the observation that clearly
where there are environmental, um, challenges,
then they need to be met by all the relevant parties,
understanding what's needed and working towards that aim.
Do you accept that? Um,
Uh, and,
and many will try to deny that that,
that the intensification through the tenure review process
ha has delivered, um, you know,
some environmental impacts on places like Ash Burton Lakes,
which is making it hard for both the lessees
and for others to kind of move on in an economic way.
But, um, clearly, um, has an obligation to work
with regional councils on some of that stuff.
Yeah, I think reasonable minds can differ on the extent
to which different, um,
practices including tenure review have impacted on the
scenario that we have in front of us today.
But I think more importantly,
and certainly my focus as minister is trying
to understand from all the relevant parties
how we can ensure that we've got a regime going forward
that maximizes, um, both ecological, um, protection,
but also, um, productive use of the land more generally.
And I don't see those as mutually inconsistent.
I think it's, you know, maybe I'm naive,
but, um, I I do think it's possible
to have win-win scenarios in the space when all parties
clearly understand what's at stake
and what could be achievable.
Um, and you know, that's not to form a judgment
either way in terms of tenure review practices of the past.
Um, I have to mention Shannon,
but I, the you've done a great job of
divesting um, of transferring.
That's not what you banned. No, no, no, no.
This is, I'm just, I'm being, yeah,
Very good. Yeah.
In terms of the trees, that's been fantastic.
And, um, I just hope that
we can learn a lesson from the Shannon Houses debacle.
And I realize it's not your fault,
but I do understand that you've got 175, um,
uninhabited houses at the moment,
although Sonya did say that might be slightly less,
there's 24 that are, um, need to be demolished.
And I just wonder if we can, if expediated the,
the other process, I wonder if you've got any plans afoot
or if you think of any way that you can,
rather than ending up having to demolish the all
of those houses because they get there for too long,
then do you have any plans
or are you working on anything to alleviate
that happening in the future?
Um, so you can save them before they're Yeah.
Rather than we are paying rates on them, looking after them,
and then they end up getting demolished.
Yeah. Uh, I think through Mr.
Chair, I might invite someone the gay might identify whether
it's Sonia Wiki or others to, to explain more, more,
more knowledgeably than I could manage if there were any
particular intentions in that regard.
Um, I mean, it seems to me, if I can just
Probably already crossed, We just try it again.
Are you wondering if I'm gonna say the same thing
or different, um, helpfully from my point of view at least,
I, I, I can't offer anything that would be helpful
to the committee, I'm afraid at that
Point. Thank you very much. We
talked
About that. No,
thank you. Right. Any questions,
Mike? Alright, thank
you for, seems us got more time.
Um, I just wanna go back to some documentaries on the,
the topic I was talking about before.
Um, in, in his submission, Dame
and Simon stated that there should be a rigorous examination
of the previous record of international forestry companies
before they're allowed to operate in this country.
And of the credibility of claims benefits for New Zealand.
What step, um, what steps were taken by Lins
and South, um, in the last financial year
to conduct this type of examination?
And if any, how can yourself assure the public
that the proposals within the bill will ensure the
credibility of claim benefits
for New Zealanders compared to the act?
Yeah, I, I, I think, um, Dame Ann makes a good point
that if I can paraphrase
or, you know, extract what I think is the, the meaningful,
um, Element within her submission
that we should always consider carefully, um, benefits
that are claimed in a submission.
And I would make that
as a board characterization in any particular
or indeed forestry companies in general.
I think the way that, um, the official, uh, excuse me,
the overseas investment office, um, views matters
of application is to consider, um,
on the merits the application in front of them, consider,
uh, if granting consent, then
what conditions should be put in place so
that we don't simply take the applicant at its word
that it will do certain things in a certain period
of time without, you know, ensuring
that that is indeed the case.
Um, you know, with the ultimate consequence
that a consent can be, um, you know,
removed, I suppose at that point.
But also it seems to me
that the OIO is really diligent in its decision making on a
current application by considering the past
practices of the applicant.
To me that seems appropriate as, as a guide at least to, um,
whether we can feel comfortable
that they will operate in good faith and meet obligations
and commitments they've made in the current application.
Final one from me too.
Um, I guess following the significant breach of the, um,
overseas Investment Act by Auckland, um,
lawyer Andrew Jarvis, um, allowing overseas investors
to acquire sense of land without consent, um, can you point
to tangible system changes, um, strengthened
internal controls or, uh, or staff capability improvements?
And what evidence exists, um,
of improved enforcement decisions making over the last year?
Um, I, I know you're not asking me to comment on
that particular matter, um,
but just to be really clear, obviously no comments
that I make will relate particularly to a specific, uh,
matter, um, of, of breach or otherwise.
Uh, it seems to me that the, um, practices that,
that the OIO has to ensure, um, a robust
and enforceable system, um, are appropriate.
Um, I probably couldn't speak authoritatively to the extent
to which they've been brought in at a certain period
of time in, in relation to a certain event.
Um, I mean through Mr.
Chair, if, if, if that's detail that you're keen to get,
then I would, you know, respectfully request that I'd, um,
you know, be in invite, um, CE of Lins to identify someone
who could, um, by more detail on that point.
Would that be helpful? Thanks.
Let's hear the question again. They're doing patent as
Rock. Yeah,
I say helpful.
Yes. Mr. Pedro Morgan's a short straw in his sand.
So would you repeat the question please? Sure.
Um, I able to point to tangible system changes
strengthened internal controls
or staff capability improvements
and what evidence exists
of improved enforcement decisions over the last
Year? So you
you mean within Lins
Yeah, within Lins right.
To, I guess, prevent, uh, another scenario happen.
So, so I, I think to prevent a scenario of the, the, the,
of the type involving Mr. Jarvis, yeah,
the system changes already need
to be within the law firms themselves, not within Lins.
Um, it, it's our role to detect those changes
to take action against them once they arise.
Uh, and in that regard, we have always had
and continue to have quite a strong presence within the
legal community from an education perspective.
Um, a a a key concept that we present in particular
to lawyers and real estate agents, those are the two
we most often share this with, is the notion
that the starting point is compliance.
That investors should seek good legal advice.
Uh, they should either get consent for a transaction
or they shouldn't undertake it.
Um, unless of course they don't need consent.
And I think what happened in the case of Mr. Jarvis
and those transactions as the starting point wasn't
compliance, the starting point was the notion
that there was a way to avoid the need for consent,
we'll do this or that, or this scheme
or that scheme, uh, to, to to, to get
around the act, um, in some way.
And the message we've always been very clear about
with lawyers is that that's not the right approach.
And in the case of Mr. Jarvis, I guess there was a, a a,
a change in, um, in behavior on our part.
Of course it was, you know, further, further ago.
And that is to not simply take action against the investor's
concern, but start to single out the lawyer.
Um, in that case, our proceedings were in the first instance
against Mr. Jarvis
and in the second instance against his clients
rather than the, the other way around.
'cause that's where we saw the fault lying.
Um, we're on the lookout for that.
We've taken similar action, we discussed it earlier, um,
in respect of a real estate agent,
quite different circumstances,
but we've now got, um, the high court on record both
for lawyers and real estate agents, emphasizing the fact
that they have, that there is an expectation
that they have a knowledge of the regime, an expectation
that they advise their clients, um, professionally.
Um, and, and that notion of starting from the, the,
the position of consent, um, I think just in the last, um,
few days, uh, during a pigeon who's a, a well known
and very well respected lawyer in Auckland has come out
with some comments, uh, regarding, um,
the government's proposed changes
to the investor visa scheme, um, very clearly warning, uh,
investors not to try and, and,
and their, their advisors
not try and get around this scheme.
Don't, don't try and add a, a Colin Hannan
to the purchase price, I think
was one of the examples. That's fine
Just outside for you.
Oh, we'll pick it up right our way fast.
Um, but it, but it's really pleasing for us, um, to hear
that kind of messaging coming from
within the professional groups.
It was echoed by real estate agents in that case as well.
'cause I think it's a sign that the messaging
that we've been giving to them has resonated when they start
repeating it themselves within their
own professional communities.
It's like the tax system.
They're part of the regulatory ecosystem. Mm.
And uh, I think, think we've given them that message
for a number of years now.
We, we, we, we have real estate agents
and lawyers are very much the, you know, the, the,
the fence at the top of the cliff.
We, we help them to help their clients to
Comply.
Very good strategy, rely on real estate agents.
I was thinking real, real estate agents and lawyers,
but we're all politicians, so I'm not sure.
Didn't say it perfect. The race to the bottom.
Some of us are former lawyers, so whether we're going up
or down on the estimation of the public, on the subject
of ethics, you can say,
Um, look, look, thank you Mr.
And, and I, I'll just come back to overseas investment.
And um, last year I think what $17.5 billion were approved
through 642 applications.
So it's quite a lot of money.
And, and then I, I just quote here that
we focused on the overseas investment regime
because it has a complex system
that directly supports the New Zealand economy.
The assumption that every dollar that comes
and supports our economy,
and there might be some people who think otherwise.
And so some of that will be perhaps greenfields
or innovative kind of funding.
Some of it'll just be to change the ownership. Mm.
So my question to you is, is does ownership matter
and do you think it should be a consideration of that,
that investment dollar?
Because the assumption through what we read here is
that every dollar coming in is beneficial.
I think owner, of course,
ownership matters on a certain level
because if we as a, as a nation
and as a government didn't think
that ownership mattered at all,
then there would be no point in having an overseas
investment regime at all.
Um, and we would simply have an open Slava kind of, um,
world in which we were living.
But I think in general terms, um, the worldview
of this government is that, um, overseas investment
has great opportunity
and potential to provide, uh, benefit, um,
which can come in a number of different forms.
Again, employment skills, uh, and so on.
But I think there's an interesting question as to whether
a change of use is required to bring about benefit.
Um, whereas I would argue that if, uh,
land is being productively farmed currently by New Zealand
persons, but they will be unable to continue
to productively farm it
and they're unable to find the New Zealand buyer
for the farm to be able to continue to productively farm
that then it might be that benefit is available
to New Zealand by an overseas person purchasing the
farm and continuing to farm it productively so
that we don't lose the jobs that we already have,
which I appreciate as a different, uh, way
of looking at the composition.
We should go look at more than jobs.
Sorry, do we have to look at more than jobs?
Well, we, we can look at more than jobs.
Yeah. The number of different do you
Think we should in terms of a benefit assessment?
Yeah, I, I think there's lots
of different categories of economic benefit.
I, as I've said, I think employment, uh,
is one such category.
I think skills, um, I think, um, contributing
to a productive economy in the sense
of export dollar receipts, I think revenue to the government
for all the activities that we wish
land information New Zealand and other agencies
to perform on our behalf are all categories of benefit.
And we need to carefully, um, consider all of those against,
you know, obviously factors that might weigh, um,
in the opposite direction.
I, I guess, uh, and it's a genuine question around,
you know, the kind of evolving assessment of
what is beneficial or net benefit to New Zealand, I guess.
Yeah, if you assume, say the seven, the um, the 17 billion,
you know, there's 800 million flows out from New Zealand
by way of return at 5%, then should we sit down
and say, well we need to see more than,
more than $800 million of accumulated value to New Zealand
to justify that investment?
Yeah, I, I'm, I'm not prepared to venture a view on
what a particular, uh, numerical threshold should be.
Um, but obviously reasonable minds can differ about
where such a threshold should be set, if, if indeed one. I
Appreciate it. And, and, and I,
I, it's a really around the one off
net benefit to New Zealand
and whether that is actually a requirement or should be
because you have a directive letter that could actually make
that adjustment if necessary.
Okay. That's fair.
Alright, any further questions at all?
It seems like there aren't so, uh,
thank minister and the officials,
Thank you very much.
Thank you team. Really, really appreciate the thoughtful
and constructive and good faith basis of the questions.
Thank you for the opportunity to be
with you alongside our friends Land Information Zealand.
I think, I think.